Hum Genet. 2024 May;143(5):703-719. doi: 10.1007/s00439-024-02672-3. Epub 2024 
Apr 12.

Examination of the shared genetic architecture between multiple sclerosis and 
systemic lupus erythematosus facilitates discovery of novel lupus risk loci.

Kerns S(1)(2), Owen KA(3)(4), Schwalbe D(3)(4), Grammer AC(3)(4), Lipsky 
PE(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)AMPEL BioSolutions, LLC, Charlottesville, VA, 22902, USA. 
sophia.kerns@ampelbiosolutions.com.
(2)The RILITE Research Institute, Charlottesville, VA, 22902, USA. 
sophia.kerns@ampelbiosolutions.com.
(3)AMPEL BioSolutions, LLC, Charlottesville, VA, 22902, USA.
(4)The RILITE Research Institute, Charlottesville, VA, 22902, USA.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease with heterogeneous 
manifestations, including neurological and psychiatric symptoms. Genetic 
association studies in SLE have been hampered by insufficient sample size and 
limited power compared to many other diseases. Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a 
chronic relapsing autoimmune disease of the central nervous system (CNS) that 
also manifests neurological and immunological features. Here, we identify a 
method of leveraging large-scale genome wide association studies (GWAS) in MS to 
identify novel genetic risk loci in SLE. Statistical genetic comparison methods 
including linkage disequilibrium score regression (LDSC) and cross-phenotype 
association analysis (CPASSOC) to identify genetic overlap in disease 
pathophysiology, traditional 2-sample and novel PPI-based mendelian 
randomization to identify causal associations and Bayesian colocalization were 
applied to association studies conducted in MS to facilitate discovery in the 
smaller, more limited datasets available for SLE. Pathway analysis using 
SNP-to-gene mapping identified biological networks composed of molecular 
pathways with causal implications for CNS disease in SLE specifically, as well 
as pathways likely causal of both pathologies, providing key insights for 
therapeutic selection.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-024-02672-3
PMID: 38609570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


Int J Mol Med. 2024 Feb;53(2):20. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2024.5344. Epub 2024 Jan 8.

Association of endometriosis with Sjögren's syndrome: Genetic insights (Review).

Zervou MI(1), Tarlatzis BC(2), Grimbizis GF(3), Spandidos DA(4), Niewold TB(5), 
Goulielmos GN(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Molecular Pathology and Human Genetics, Department of Internal 
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Crete, 71403 Heraklion, Greece.
(2)First Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Aristotle 
University of Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece.
(3)Unit for Human Reproduction, First Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
'Papageorgiou' General Hospital, Aristotle University Medical School, 56403 
Thessaloniki, Greece.
(4)Laboratory of Clinical Virology, School of Medicine, University of Crete, 
71403 Heraklion, Greece.
(5)Barbara Volcker Center for Women and Rheumatic Disease, New York, NY 10021, 
USA.

Patients with a history of endometriosis have an increased risk of developing 
various autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing 
spondylitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, multiple sclerosis and celiac 
disease. There is a potential association between endometriosis and an increased 
susceptibility for Sjögren's syndrome (SS). SS is a common chronic, 
inflammatory, systemic, autoimmune, multifactorial disease of complex pathology, 
with genetic, epigenetic and environmental factors contributing to the 
development of this condition. It occurs in 0.5‑1% of the population, is 
characterized by the presence of ocular dryness, lymphocytic infiltrations and 
contributes to neurological, gastrointestinal, vascular and dermatological 
manifestations. Endometriosis is an inflammatory, estrogen‑dependent, 
multifactorial, heterogeneous gynecological disease, affecting ≤10% of 
reproductive‑age women. It is characterized by the occurrence of endometrial 
tissue outside the uterine cavity, mainly in the pelvic cavity, and is 
associated with pelvic pain, dysmenorrhea, deep dyspareunia and either 
subfertility or infertility. It is still unclear whether SS appears as a 
secondary response to endometriosis, or it is developed due to any potential 
shared mechanisms of these conditions. The aim of the present review was to 
explore further the biological basis only of the co‑occurrence of these 
disorders but not their association at clinical basis, focusing on the analysis 
of the partially shared genetic background between endometriosis and SS, and the 
clarification of the possible similarities in the underlying pathogenetic 
mechanisms and the relevant molecular pathways.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2024.5344
PMCID: PMC10781419
PMID: 38186322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MIZ, BCT, GFG, TBN and GNG (all authors other 
than DAS) declare that they have no competing interests. DAS is the 
Editor-in-Chief for the journal, but had no personal involvement in the 
reviewing process, or any influence in terms of adjudicating on the final 
decision, for this article.


Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2023 Jun;64(3):392-411. doi: 
10.1007/s12016-022-08951-z. Epub 2022 Jun 24.

A Summary on the Genetics of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, Rheumatoid Arthritis, 
Systemic Sclerosis, and Sjögren's Syndrome.

Ortíz-Fernández L(1), Martín J(1), Alarcón-Riquelme ME(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Parasitology and Biomedicine López-Neyra, CSIC, Parque 
Tecnológico de La Salud, 18016, Granada, Spain.
(2)GENYO. Center for Genomics and Oncological Research, Pfizer/University of 
Granada/Andalusian Regional Government, Av de la Ilustración 114, Parque 
Tecnológico de La Salud, 18016, Granada, Spain. marta.alarcon@genyo.es.
(3)Institute for Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77, Solna, 
Sweden. marta.alarcon@genyo.es.

Systemic lupus erythematosus, systemic sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and 
Sjögren's syndrome are four major autoimmune rheumatic diseases characterized by 
the presence of autoantibodies, caused by a dysregulation of the immune system 
that leads to a wide variety of clinical manifestations. These conditions 
present complex etiologies strongly influenced by multiple environmental and 
genetic factors. The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region was the first locus 
identified to be associated and still represents the strongest susceptibility 
factor for each of these conditions, particularly the HLA class II genes, 
including DQA1, DQB1, and DRB1, but class I genes have also been associated. 
Over the last two decades, the genetic component of these disorders has been 
extensively investigated and hundreds of non-HLA risk genetic variants have been 
uncovered. Furthermore, it is widely accepted that autoimmune rheumatic diseases 
share molecular disease pathways, such as the interferon (IFN) type I pathways, 
which are reflected in a common genetic background. Some examples of well-known 
pleiotropic loci for autoimmune rheumatic diseases are the HLA region, DNASEL13, 
TNIP1, and IRF5, among others. The identification of the causal molecular 
mechanisms behind the genetic associations is still a challenge. However, recent 
advances have been achieved through mouse models and functional studies of the 
loci. Here, we provide an updated overview of the genetic architecture 
underlying these four autoimmune rheumatic diseases, with a special focus on the 
HLA region.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-022-08951-z
PMID: 35749015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


Ther Adv Musculoskelet Dis. 2020 Dec 16;12:1759720X20969261. doi: 
10.1177/1759720X20969261. eCollection 2020.

Shared development of targeted therapies among autoimmune and inflammatory 
diseases: a systematic repurposing analysis.

Petitdemange A(1), Blaess J(1), Sibilia J(1), Felten R(1), Arnaud L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, National Reference Center for Auto-Immune 
Diseases (RESO), Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
(2)Service de rhumatologie, Centre National de Référence des Maladies 
Autoimmunes et Systémiques Rares, Hôpital de Hautepierre, 1 Avenue Molière BP 
83049, Strasbourg Cedex, 67098, France.

BACKGROUND: Pathogenic inflammatory pathways are largely shared between 
different autoimmune and inflammatory diseases (AIDs). This offers the potential 
to develop a given targeted therapy in several AIDs.
METHODS: We analyzed two clinical trials registries (ClinicalTrials.gov and EU 
Clinical Trials Register) to identify the targeted therapies whose development 
is shared between at least two of the most common AIDs [rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA), spondyloarthritis (SpA), cutaneous psoriasis (cPso), inflammatory bowel 
diseases (IBD), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), primary Sjögren's syndrome 
(pSS), systemic sclerosis (SSc), idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (IIM), giant 
cell arteritis (GCA), and multiple sclerosis (MS)] using an in-depth repurposing 
analysis.
RESULTS: We identified 142 shared targeted therapies. The four diseases in which 
shared targeted therapies were the most numerous were RA (n = 92), cPso 
(n = 67), IBD (n = 58), and SLE (n = 56). The two clusters of diseases between 
which the overlap of targeted therapies was the most important were RA and SLE 
as well as RA, SpA, cPso, and IBD. The targeted therapies which were shared by 
five diseases or more were abatacept, ustekinumab, rituximab, anakinra, 
etanercept, infliximab, secukinumab, tofacitinib, alemtuzumab, tocilizumab, 
adalimumab, apremilast, baricitinib, belimumab, brodalumab, filgotinib, and 
upadacitinib. The most frequently targeted molecules and pathways were (by 
descending frequency): JAK-STAT pathways, Th17 axis, TNF-α, IL-6, costimulation 
molecules, BAFF, CD20, BTK, chemokines and integrins, IL-1, and type I 
interferon.
CONCLUSION: Many targeted therapies are developed in several AIDs, reflecting 
the overlap of pathogenic pathways and potential of drug repurposing. This 
suggests that a revision of the current, clinically based classification of AIDs 
towards a more mechanistic-based taxonomy might be relevant.

© The Author(s), 2020.

DOI: 10.1177/1759720X20969261
PMCID: PMC7747103
PMID: 33403021

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: Arthur 
PETITDEMANGE: no competing interest. Julien BLAESS: no competing interest. Jean 
SIBILIA has acted as a consultant for Roche, Chugai, Bristol-Myers Squibb, UCB, 
GSK, LFB, Actelion, Pfizer, MSD, Novartis, Amgen, Abbvie, Sandoz, Gilead, Lilly, 
Sanofi Genzyme, Janssen, Mylan. Renaud FELTEN has participated to Advisory 
Boards for AbbVie, Novartis and received invitations or performed interventions 
for Abbvie, BMS, Lilly, Novartis, MSD, Pfizer, Sanofi, UCB. Laurent ARNAUD has 
acted as a consultant for Alexion, Amgen, Astra-Zeneca, GSK, Janssen-Cilag, LFB, 
Lilly, Menarini France, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche-Chugaï, UCB.


Lupus. 2019 Nov;28(13):1524-1533. doi: 10.1177/0961203319885447. Epub 2019 Oct 
29.

Type I interferon gene signature test-low and -high patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus have distinct gene expression signatures.

Brohawn PZ(1), Streicher K(1), Higgs BW(1), Morehouse C(1), Liu H(1), Illei 
G(1), Ranade K(1).

Author information:
(1)AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Type I interferon (IFN) is implicated in systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE) pathogenesis. We aimed to identify type I IFN 
signaling-dependent and -independent molecular pathways in a large population of 
patients with SLE.
METHODS: Baseline blood samples from adult patients with moderate to severe SLE 
from two Phase IIb studies (NCT01438489, n = 265; NCT01283139, n = 416) were 
profiled using whole transcriptome array analyses. Type I IFN gene signature 
(IFNGS) test status (high or low) was determined using a validated qualitative 
polymerase chain reaction-based test. IFN-type-specific signatures were 
developed by stimulating healthy blood with IFN-β, IFN-γ, IFN-λ, IFN-ω, or 
pooled IFN-α. These, and multiple literature-derived cell type and cytokine 
pathway signatures, were evaluated in individual and pooled study populations. A 
Fisher's exact test was used for associations, adjusted for false discovery 
rate.
RESULTS: Whole blood samples from IFNGS test-high patients were enriched versus 
IFNGS test-low patients for CD40L signaling (Q < 0.001), CXC cytokine 
(Q < 0.001), TLR8-mediated monocyte activation (Q < 0.001), IgG (Q < 0.001), 
major histocompatibility complex class I (Q < 0.001), and plasma cell 
(Q < 0.001) gene expression signatures. IFNGS test-low patients had significant 
enrichment of eosinophil (Q < 0.001), IFN-γ-specific (Q = 0.005), and T-cell or 
B-cell (Q < 0.001) signatures. Similar enrichment profiles were demonstrated in 
patients with primary Sjögren's syndrome, systemic sclerosis, and 
dermatomyositis.
CONCLUSIONS: IFNGS test-high patients overexpressed many gene signatures 
associated with SLE pathogenesis compared with IFNGS test-low patients, 
reflecting broad immune activation. These results provide new insights into the 
molecular heterogeneity underlying SLE pathogenesis, highlighting shared 
mechanisms beyond type I IFN, across several autoimmune diseases.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov: NCT01438489 and NCT01283139.

DOI: 10.1177/0961203319885447
PMID: 31660791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


Autoimmun Rev. 2018 Jun;17(6):625-635. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2018.01.012. Epub 
2018 Apr 7.

Systemic lupus erythematosus and systemic sclerosis: All roads lead to 
platelets.

Scherlinger M(1), Guillotin V(2), Truchetet ME(1), Contin-Bordes C(3), Sisirak 
V(4), Duffau P(2), Lazaro E(3), Richez C(1), Blanco P(5).

Author information:
(1)Service de Rhumatologie, FHU ACRONIM, Hôpital Pellegrin, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire, Place Amélie Raba Léon, 33076 Bordeaux, France; Université de 
Bordeaux, 146 rue Léo Saignat, 33076 Bordeaux, France; CNRS-UMR 5164, 
ImmunoConcept, Université de Bordeaux, 146 rue Léo Saignat, 33076 Bordeaux, 
France.
(2)Service de médecine interne, FHU ACRONIM, Hôpital Saint André, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire, 1 rue Jean Burguet, 33076 Bordeaux, France; 
Université de Bordeaux, 146 rue Léo Saignat, 33076 Bordeaux, France; CNRS-UMR 
5164, ImmunoConcept, Université de Bordeaux, 146 rue Léo Saignat, 33076 
Bordeaux, France.
(3)Laboratoire d'Immunologie et Immunogénétique, FHU ACRONIM, Hôpital Pellegrin, 
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Place Amélie Raba Léon, 33076 Bordeaux, 
France; Université de Bordeaux, 146 rue Léo Saignat, 33076 Bordeaux, France; 
CNRS-UMR 5164, ImmunoConcept, Université de Bordeaux, 146 rue Léo Saignat, 33076 
Bordeaux, France.
(4)Université de Bordeaux, 146 rue Léo Saignat, 33076 Bordeaux, France; CNRS-UMR 
5164, ImmunoConcept, Université de Bordeaux, 146 rue Léo Saignat, 33076 
Bordeaux, France.
(5)Laboratoire d'Immunologie et Immunogénétique, FHU ACRONIM, Hôpital Pellegrin, 
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Place Amélie Raba Léon, 33076 Bordeaux, 
France; Université de Bordeaux, 146 rue Léo Saignat, 33076 Bordeaux, France; 
CNRS-UMR 5164, ImmunoConcept, Université de Bordeaux, 146 rue Léo Saignat, 33076 
Bordeaux, France. Electronic address: patrick.blanco@chu-bordeaux.fr.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and systemic sclerosis (SSc) are two 
phenotypically distincts inflammatory systemic diseases. However, SLE and SSc 
share pathogenic features such as interferon signature, loss of tolerance 
against self-nuclear antigens and increased tissue damage such as fibrosis. 
Recently, platelets have emerged as a major actor in immunity including 
auto-immune diseases. Both SLE and SSc are characterized by strong platelet 
system activation, which is likely to be both the witness and culprit in their 
pathogenesis. Platelet activation pathways are multiple and sometimes redundant. 
They include immune complexes, Toll-like receptors activation, antiphospholipid 
antibodies and ischemia-reperfusion associated with Raynaud phenomenon. Once 
activated, platelet promote immune dysregulation by priming interferon 
production by immune cells, providing CD40L supporting B lymphocyte functions 
and providing a source of autoantigens. Platelets are actively implicated in SLE 
and SSc end-organ damage such as cardiovascular and renal disease and in the 
promotion of tissue fibrosis. Finally, after understanding the main pathogenic 
implications of platelet activation in both diseases, we discuss potential 
therapeutics targeting platelets.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2018.01.012
PMID: 29635077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


Psoriasis (Auckl). 2016 Feb 22;6:7-32. doi: 10.2147/PTT.S64950. eCollection 
2016.

Current knowledge on psoriasis and autoimmune diseases.

Ayala-Fontánez N(1)(2), Soler DC(1)(2), McCormick TS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, 
USA.
(2)The Murdough Family Center for Psoriasis, University Hospitals Case Medical 
Center, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Psoriasis is a prevalent, chronic inflammatory disease of the skin, mediated by 
crosstalk between epidermal keratinocytes, dermal vascular cells, and 
immunocytes such as antigen presenting cells (APCs) and T cells. Exclusive 
cellular "responsibility" for the induction and maintenance of psoriatic plaques 
has not been clearly defined. Increased proliferation of keratinocytes and 
endothelial cells in conjunction with APC/T cell/monocyte/macrophage 
inflammation leads to the distinct epidermal and vascular hyperplasia that is 
characteristic of lesional psoriatic skin. Despite the identification of 
numerous susceptibility loci, no single genetic determinant has been identified 
as responsible for the induction of psoriasis. Thus, numerous other triggers of 
disease, such as environmental, microbial and complex cellular interactions must 
also be considered as participants in the development of this multifactorial 
disease. Recent advances in therapeutics, especially systemic so-called 
"biologics" have provided new hope for identifying the critical cellular targets 
that drive psoriasis pathogenesis. Recent recognition of the numerous 
co-morbidities and other autoimmune disorders associated with psoriasis, 
including inflammatory bowel disease, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, 
and systemic lupus erythematosus suggest common signaling elements and cellular 
mediators may direct disease pathogenesis. In this review, we discuss common 
cellular pathways and participants that mediate psoriasis and other autoimmune 
disorders that share these cellular signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.2147/PTT.S64950
PMCID: PMC5683130
PMID: 29387591

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors have no conflict of 
interest to disclose.


Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2013 Aug;43(1):125-30. doi: 
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2012.12.005. Epub 2013 Jan 24.

Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain containing 2: structure, function, and 
diseases.

Yao Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatic and Immunologic Diseases/A50, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 
Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. yaoq@ccf.org

OBJECTIVES: To systematically review literature about the structure and function 
of nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain containing 2 (NOD2) and its disease 
association.
METHODS: The English literature was searched using keywords "NOD2" and 
"disease". Relevant original and review articles were reviewed.
RESULTS: NOD2 is an intracellular protein and shares similar molecular structure 
with NOD1, pyrin, and cryopyrin. There are more than 100 NOD2 gene mutations, 
some of which have been linked to diseases such as Crohn disease, Blau syndrome, 
and NOD2-associated autoinflammatory disease (NAID). The NOD2 variants located 
in the leucine-rich repeat (LRR) region are susceptible to Crohn disease, and 
the variants in the nucleotide-binding domain (NBD) and in between the NBD and 
LRR are associated with Blau syndrome and NAID, respectively. No disease 
association with the gene variants has been found in rheumatoid arthritis, 
systemic lupus erythematosus, ankylosing spondylitis, psoriasis/psoriatic 
arthritis, adult sarcoidosis, granulomatous polyangiitis, or multiple sclerosis. 
The potential association of the NOD2 variants with graft-versus-host-disease 
remains controversial. NOD2 functions mainly through RICK or RIP2 to activate 
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinases and NF-κB, resulting in inflammatory 
response, and enhanced autophagic activity. Biologic therapy may be beneficial 
for NOD2-associated diseases, and new drug development may be realized based 
upon the signaling pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: NOD2 gene mutations are associated with several diseases, and some 
of the mutations are of diagnostic value in Blau disease and NAID. To understand 
the NOD2 function, disease association, and its pathogenesis is important given 
the ever increasing clinical significance of NOD2.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2012.12.005
PMID: 23352252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


J Autoimmun. 2012 May;38(2-3):J254-65. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2011.12.001. Epub 
2011 Dec 27.

Sex differences and genomics in autoimmune diseases.

Amur S(1), Parekh A, Mummaneni P.

Author information:
(1)Office of Clinical Pharmacology, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, 
Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD 20903, USA. 
Shashi.amur@fda.hhs.gov

Autoimmune diseases (AIDs) are believed to be multifactorial diseases that 
commonly involve multiple organ systems. About three fourth of the patients 
afflicted with AIDs are women suggesting that sex differences impact the 
incidence of AID. However, the proportion of females to males suffering from AID 
varies depending on the disease. The response to some AID therapeutics also 
differs in females versus males, suggesting that enrollment of adequate numbers 
of women and men is important in clinical trials for development of AID drugs. 
It is known for a long time that genetic factors are important contributors to 
AID susceptibility. Currently available information suggests that multiple genes 
with modest association to AID contribute to susceptibility to AID. Also, the 
associations may differ for the various ethnicities. The major 
histocompatibility (MHC) locus appears to be a major genetic factor that confers 
susceptibility to multiple AIDs, even though the locus is complex and has the 
highest density of genes in the human genome. Thus, the association of different 
AIDs could be with different genes in the MHC locus. Among the non-MHC genes, 
some of the risk alleles are shared between different AIDs, but may not be 
common to all AIDs. For example, genetic polymorphisms in the Protein Tyrosine 
Phosphatase-22 (PTPN22) gene have reproducibly shown to have association with 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), Graves' disease (GD), rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA) and multiple sclerosis (MS), but not with psoriasis. Identification of 
factors responsible for risk for developing AID and the of the pathways 
underlying these diseases are likely to help understand subsets of disease, 
identify responders to a specific treatment and develop better therapeutics for 
AID.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2011.12.001
PMID: 22204900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jun 7;108(23):9542-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1018182108. Epub 2011 May 18.

Key role for IL-21 in experimental autoimmune uveitis.

Wang L(1), Yu CR, Kim HP, Liao W, Telford WG, Egwuagu CE, Leonard WJ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

IL-21 is a pleiotropic type 1 cytokine that shares the common cytokine receptor 
γ-chain, γ(c), with IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, and IL-15. IL-21 is most homologous 
to IL-2. These cytokines are encoded by adjacent genes, but they are 
functionally distinct. Whereas IL-2 promotes development of regulatory T cells 
and confers protection from autoimmune disease, IL-21 promotes differentiation 
of Th17 cells and is implicated in several autoimmune diseases, including type 1 
diabetes and systemic lupus erythematosus. However, the roles of IL-21 and IL-2 
in CNS autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis and uveitis have been 
controversial. Here, we generated Il21-mCherry/Il2-emGFP dual-reporter 
transgenic mice and showed that development of experimental autoimmune uveitis 
(EAU) correlated with the presence of T cells coexpressing IL-21 and IL-2 into 
the retina. Furthermore, Il21r(-/-) mice were more resistant to EAU development 
than wild-type mice, and adoptive transfer of Il21r(-/-) T cells induced much 
less severe EAU, underscoring the need for IL-21 in the development of this 
disease and suggesting that blocking IL-21/γ(c)-signaling pathways may provide a 
means for controlling CNS auto-inflammatory diseases.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1018182108
PMCID: PMC3111309
PMID: 21593413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: W.J.L. is an 
inventor on patents and patent applications related to IL-21.


