Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2001 Mar;933:1-23. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2001.tb05810.x.

The compelling anomaly of chemical intolerance.

Miller CS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Texas Health 
Science Center at San Antonio, 78229-3900, USA. millercs@uthscsa.edu

In science, anomalies expose the limitations of existing paradigms and drive the 
search for new ones. In the late 1800s, physicians observed that certain 
illnesses spread from sick, feverish individuals to those contacting them, 
paving the way for the germ theory of disease. The germ theory served as a 
crude, but elegant formulation that explained dozens of seemingly unrelated 
illnesses affecting literally every organ system. Today, we are witnessing 
another medical anomaly-a unique pattern of illness involving chemically exposed 
groups in more than a dozen countries, who subsequently report multisystem 
symptoms and new-onset chemical, food, and drug intolerances. These intolerances 
may be the hallmark for a new disease process or paradigm, just as fever is a 
hallmark for infection. The fact that diverse demographic groups, sharing little 
in common except some initial chemical exposure event, develop these 
intolerances is a compelling anomaly pointing to a possible new theory of 
disease, one that has been referred to as "Toxicant-Induced Loss of Tolerance" 
("TILT"). TILT has the potential to explain certain cases of asthma, migraine 
headaches, and depression, as well as chronic fatigue, fibromyalgia, and "Gulf 
War syndrome". It appears to evolve in two stages: (1) initiation, characterized 
by a profound breakdown in prior, natural tolerance resulting from either acute 
or chronic exposure to chemicals (pesticides, solvents, indoor air contaminants, 
etc.), followed by (2) triggering of symptoms by small quantities of previously 
tolerated chemicals (traffic exhaust, fragrances, gasoline), foods, drugs, and 
food/drug combinations (alcohol, caffeine). While the underlying dynamic remains 
an enigma, observations indicating that affected individuals respond to 
structurally unrelated drugs and experience cravings and withdrawal-like 
symptoms, paralleling drug addiction, suggest that multiple neurotransmitter 
pathways may be involved.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2001.tb05810.x
PMID: 12000012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


